Physics debugging debug draw ray physics, debugger window and profiler window.
In this video we'll cover what is debugging and what are the challenges of debugging physics.
We'll examine the tools that we have to help us out, and then we'll open up unity and tackle some common
scenarios.
So what is debugging?
A bug is an error flaw.
Failure or fault in computer programming.
Debugging is the process of identifying and removing those errors from software.
So what are the challenges with debugging physics specifically?
Well, physics is a highly complex and resource intensive system, so optimization is important.
Physics includes a lot of setup settings, components, properties and more, as well as your own custom
code properties, event handlers and more together.
This is a lot of complexity.
Now luckily, unity automatically does a lot for you with unity physics, that's good.
But due to the system complexity, there's a lot that can go wrong and that's bad.
So what are tools for general debugging?
The Unity console window is very important.
It shows the errors, warnings and other messages generated by unity.
It will also show your custom messages which you generate with debug log to open it up.
Use the unity window.
General console window usage is just detecting.
Did unity reach this line of code?
And you can also say what is the specific value of a property or a variable you can see in the code
snippet debug log Hello world passes that message up to the console breakpoints pause the game at a
specific moment in code and allows you to inspect all the variables that are in memory.
The setup is you attach the code editor unity and you set a breakpoint by clicking out in the margin.
You run unity and play it normally, waiting for unity to pause.
When unity pauses, it tells you you're at one of your breakpoints.
Inspect the code editor and you can continue along or stop the debug session usages here or did Unity
reach this line of code?
And what are the specific values of many of the properties and variables?
Custom debug and draw code.
Unity's API supports drawing lines and shapes in the editor when and where we want.
You can do it for non physics code too, but here are some examples that I've used.
Where exactly did the collisions occur?
Where the bounds of my object at a given moment and what was the path of my object over time?
The code is quite simple.
Let's take a look at a demo.
We'll look at the following box, will play the scene, inspect the code, we'll add our own debug log
statement to see it work in the console window, and then we'll add a breakpoint.
All right.
Let's take a look at the next scene here.
We're going to look at the following box.
And what I'm mostly interested in here is the scene view, because I've got some debug code set up.
It's going to draw some helpful guidelines, so I'll run the scene.
And while it's playing in, the cube is dropping.
I tap d a few times, I'm going to pause there.
So the lines that we're able to see here, green for contact, blue for where the box is traveled in
its lifetime and white for some key boundaries where I tapped the key.
Now, maybe you don't want to tap a key.
Maybe you want to have it happen based on some programmatic situation.
But I just wanted to show that this is based on collision, based on position, travel or user input.
This is only visible for us as developers.
It's not for the end user.
Let's jump in and take a look at the code.
You can imagine some scenarios where this would be helpful for debugging info.
So first of all, when we have a collision, we run through the collision context and we draw array.
That's how we get those little green lines.
Then whenever I tap the key, I gather a list of the positions and every frame I redraw all of those
little white boxes based on how gizmo, drawer, wire cube works.
I have to redraw them every frame, then to draw the entire path.
Pretty simple.
I just capture on start the position and then every update I do a debug draw a line from the last position
to the current position.
And that's how I get that long blue line of where the box has been in its lifetime.
That's it.
Pretty simple.
So what are the tools designed specifically for physics, debugging and unity?
Well, first of all, if we look at the rigid body in the inspector, we can see that there's an info
section that we can expand and we can see lots of very good values that are updated regularly.
This is super helpful in debugging.
You can watch it live or pause at any moment using the Unity editor pause.
Notice that it's grayed out though, so you cannot edit these values.
The physics debugger window allows you to quickly inspect the collider geometry in your scene and you
can profile some common physics based scenarios.
The profiler window displays statistics about physics that have been processed by the physics engine
in your scene.
This information can help you diagnose and resolve performance issues or unexpected discrepancies related
to your physics scene.
You can open it up and as you see in the screenshot here, we see a rising and falling line of how much
computation power is needed.
At the second, if we look for particularly high points, we can pause there and dig into the code and
look at what's causing the issue.
Let's take a look at a demo.
We'll open the following box again.
This time we'll play the scene.
We'll view the rigid bodies info.
We'll also open up these windows, the physics debugger and the physics profiler.
All right, Let's take a look at the next scene.
We're going to see the falling box again.
And this time we're going to look at a few new things, one, while the scene is playing.
I'm going to pause it here and take a look at the info of the rigid body.
Now, there's lots of helpful information here.
In the info we can see the current speed, velocity, different tensor values, etc. that could be very
helpful in debugging your code.
Also, let's take a look at window analysis and profiler.
Here we're able to look at the physics profiler over time as it's playing even it'll be updated and
scrub across and be able to see the number of dynamic colliders we have, rigid bodies, etc. that could
help you debug your scene as well.
Also, we're going to take a look at analysis and physics debugger, and I'll move this over here for
a sex so we can see it.
And what we're able to do here is while the scene is playing or while it's paused, we're able to look
at all the different coloration that it adds Swatch when I toggle it.
For showing us lots of different information about the scene colliders and which ones are sleeping,
etc. So all that together is really helpful.
That's it.
In the next section, we'll create a project, something like the Angry Birds Game.
This will be a complete 2D game that we create from scratch.
We'll create it using physics, projectile motion, using input.
We'll create game obstacles that interact with rigid body dynamics.
We'll add wind loss conditions and even add some polish at the end.